spec discussion: commitment of shard segments to global history (#267)
nazar-pc/abundance: specs/discussions/2025-05-segments-global-history.md

# Shard segments submission to the beacon chain

## Committing segments to the global history in the beacon chain

The goal of this discussion is to surface the core data structures and mechanics of the process of
committing segments to the global history in the beacon chain.

1. Child shards create new segments with 128 underlying pieces each with their
   `record || record_root || parity_record_chunks_root || record_proof`. Each child shard creates
   `RawSegments` independently (in the same way that is currently implemented). `RawSegments` are
   assigned and increasing sequence number, `local_index` that determines the order in which they

>    were created in in the shard. These segments that haven't been committed to the global history in

Reviewer: There are 256 pieces in a segment, but this is again one of those cases where there is too much explanation for things that don't really matter here. `RawSegments` do not currently exist in the code and not used anywhere in the document except in this paragraph, so maybe just say it is done exactly the same way as right now and use the same name as in the code?

   > TODO: Link to the code.

```rust
pub struct UnverifiedSegmentHeader {
    /// Segment Local Index
    pub local_index: Unaligned<SegmentIndex>,
    /// Root of roots of all records in a segment.
    pub segment_root: SegmentRoot,
    /// Hash of the segment header of the previous segment
    pub prev_segment_header_hash: Blake3Hash,
    /// Last archived block
    pub last_archived_block: LastArchivedBlock,
}

pub struct RecordedHistorySegment([Record; Self::NUM_RAW_RECORDS]);
```

2. As soon as a new segment has been created in a shard, information about their local segment
   index, segment root (and implicitly their shard ID) is included in the next block information and
   submitted to the parent shard as part of `own_segment_roots` of `LeafShardBlocksInfo`.

> NOTE: Instead of just sending segment roots in `LeafShardBlockInfo` as it is currently the case in
> the code, we also include the local segment index to help with verification and linking of
> segments. That way, we can implicitly reference segments without having to provide their segment
> root through their shard ID and local segment index. This will be necessary to minimise the flow

> > of information when reporting the finality of segments as described below.

Reviewer: The only place I can recall where this may cause difficulties is piece selection during plotting/solution verification. For any other use case it should generally make no difference what those indices are.

In fact, I think segment index plays little role here, what we really care about during piece selection is piece indices, which should ideally be contiguous for convenient sampling and verification.

From piece index the next difficulty would be to map it back to the corresponding super segment root, which I guess you were trying to address by making super segment index increase by more than 1 at a time, but it is not clear how that would actually work end-to-end.

> > of information when reporting the finality of segments as described below.

Reviewer: Thinking some more about it, we can include necessary details in the piece itself, so farmer will be able to generate a proof pointing to a specific super segment root. This is probably not super elegant, but it might be one of the more elegant options.

   `child_segment_info` and `final_child_segments` were submitted, and will follow the same approach
   used in intermediate shards to identify when a block can be considered final. Thus:

   - Leaf shard segments will be included to the global history in the beacon chain if its parent
     shard (and underlying intermediate shard) has submitted a `segment_info` and a subsequent
     `final_child_segments` through the two corresponding `IntermediateBlockShardInfo` when the
     finality has been reached, and once the block of the intermediate shard (parent shard) at which
     the `final_child_segment` was included has also reached the `FINALITY_PROBABILITY_THRESHOLD` in
     the beacon chain.
   - Intermediate shard segments will be included to the global history in the beacon chain when the
     the block of the intermediate shard where the `own_segment_info` for the shard has reached the
     `FINALITY_PROBABILITY_THRESHOLD` in the beacon chain.
   - Finally, beacon chain segments can be included into the global history and into a super segment
     as soon as they are created (as any re-org in the beacon chain will impact the ordering of the

>      global history in any case).

Author: I don't think I agree with this. While I agree that the segments are pulled from deep in the history and their content won't change, segments from the lower shards are being propagated up to the beacon chain, and this may change the order in which they are included in the beacon chain (and thus the global history index that they are assigned).

For instance, before the re-org a block A from the beacon chain may include segments from three different shards, and block B the following segments for the same three shards, but after the re-org, the new block A' may include four segments by including one from an additional shard, so even if the same three segments are included in block B', the global history indices that they will be assigned will be different.

Let me know if this makes sense, happy to discuss sync if this is easier.

   block. The super segment is created by computing the Merkle root of the tree of segments
   aggregated in the super segment, and is included in the `super_segment_root` field of the
   `SuperSegmentHeader`.
   - To compute the super segment root, segments are ordered starting from the `own_segments_root`
     of the beacon chain, and then in increasing order according to their shard ID and the
     underlying block height in which the segments (or their confirmation) where included (e.g.
     `own_segment_info_1`, `own_segment_info_2`, `intermediate_shard_segment_shard1`,
     child_shard_segment_shard1`, `intermediate_shard_segment_shard2`, etc.).
   - The super segment index is computed is determined by the number of segments aggregated in the
     super segment, and the index of the super segment in the global history of the system. If the
     previous super segment has `super_segment_index` 4 as it aggregates 4 super segments, if the
     next super segments aggregates 5 segments, the `super_segment_index` of the next super segment
     will be 4 + 5 = 9. In this way, the global history index for every segment of the shard is

>      assigned.

Reviewer: This doesn't make a lot of sense to me. I expected that super segment would be increasing by `1` each time just like segment index or block number. For me this is a very non-intuitive way of doing it and it is not clear why it is needed or what it has to do with "global history index for every segment".

```rust
struct SuperSegmentHeader {
	// Root hash of the previous super segment that chains all super segments together.
	prev_super_segment_root: Hash,
	// The root of the super segment.
	// It is computed by getting the Merkle root of the tree of segments aggregated in the super segment.
	super_segment_root: Hash,
	// Number of segments aggregated in this super segment.
   // TODO: Num segments not needed because we can look at the block in the beacon height to get the
   // number of segments, their shards and all the actual information.
	num_segments: u64
	// Index of the super segment in the global history of the system
	// (e.g. if the previous segment had super_segment_index 0, and num_segments 4,
	// this super segment will have super_segment_index 4).
	super_segment_index: u64,
	// Beacon height in which the super segment was created. This is useful to inspect the block
	// for additional information about the transactions with segment creations
	beacon_height: BlockNumber,
}
```

> 8. Farmers in lower-level shards are following the beacon chain and periodically checking for new
>    super segment creations. As soon as a new super segment is created, the farmer entitled to create
>    the next block will include a transaction that notifies the chain about the new super segment and
>    the list of segments from the shard that are part of it and can be conveniently sealed into a
>    `VerifiedSegment` as it has been included in the global history. The inclusion of a new

Reviewer: It is not checking anything periodically. Following the chain implies processing of blocks and seeing super segment right when they are created, not at some other interval.

I'd re-write the first sentence like this:
```suggestion
8. Farmers in lower-level shards are following the beacon chain and as soon as a new super segment is created, the next block producer includes information about it in the block.
```

However, I don't understand why it is needed to include either super segment or verified segment in the block at all. Could you elaborate its purpose?

> every segment that is being verified, and instead just include the segments that are being
> verified in the block body of the shard block.

```rust
pub struct VerifiedSegmentHeader {
   pub super_segment_root: Hash
    /// Index of the segment in the global history in the beacon chain
    pub segment_index: Unaligned<SegmentIndex>,
    /// Reference to the beacon chain block where the super segment for this
    /// segment was created and committed to the global history.
    pub beacon_chain_block: (BlockNumber, BlockHash),
    /// Segment Local Index
    pub local_index: Unaligned<SegmentIndex>,
    /// Root of roots of all records in a segment.
    pub segment_root: SegmentRoot,
    /// Hash of the segment header of the previous segment
    pub prev_segment_header_hash: Blake3Hash,
    /// Last archived block
    pub last_archived_block: LastArchivedBlock,
}
```

## Handling chain re-orgs.

> Note: This is a high-level overview of how re-orgs are handled and why they shouldn't impact
> greatly the operation of shards. Let me know if additional details are needed here and I can
> elaborate a bit more on it.

> - When, e.g. an intermediate shard proposes a new block `blkA`, this block will have a reference to
>   a valid block from the history of the beacon chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When leaf/intermediate shard proposes a new block `block_A`, it will point to
  a valid beacon chain block.
```

  in the longest chain rule local consensus verifications, but also logic involving the overall
  hierarchical consensus operation.
- So far so good. However, all the shards in the system are running a probabilistic consensus. What
  happens if there is a chain re-organisation and a heaviest chain surfaces replacing the current
  longest-chain? Depending on the shard suffering the re-org, the impact is different. Fortunately,
  all of them can be handled quite gracefully through the longest-chain rule.

  - Upward reorgs, meaning leaf or intermediate shards that suffer a re-org, are easily detected. As
    blocks are being submitted to the parent, the parent is able to identify that there is a
    heaviest chain that needs to replace its current view of the child shard. This requires no
    immediate action from the parent apart from this update of the parent's view of the heaviest
    chain.
  - Reorgs from intermediate shards do not involve any immediate action from its child shards. The
    newest heaviest chain may change the way (and specific blocks) where the information about the

>     child shard is being included into the parent chain and propagated to the parent chain, but this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    child shard is being included into the parent chain and propagated to the further, but this
```

    shouldn't have any additional impact.

>   - Finally, beacon chain re-orgs are the only onces that may trigger actions in the lower levels of
>     the hierarchy. When there is a heaviest chain in the beacon chain replacing the current longest
>     chain, this can trigger a re-org in some shards of the lower levels of the hierarchy that were
>     following the previous longest chain, as their beacon chain references for some of their blocks
>     may be deemed invalid. This event is also handled gracefully by the longest-chain rule. The
>     farmer entitled to create the next block in the child shard after the beacon re-org will build
>     the new block on top of the latest block in the child shard with a valid beacon chain block
>     reference after the re-org, continuing in this way constructing a valid chain in the shard.

Reviewer: This essentially boils down to a much shorter explanation that looks something like this:
```suggestion
  - In case of beacon chain reorg, all blocks of the lower level shards that reference stale beacon chain blocks automatically become stale too. Lower-level shard blocks must always point to beacon chain blocks from the canonical branch.
```

> Note: How is the beacon chain reference required to validate blocks chosen by farmers in
> lower-level shards?
>
> In terms of protocol correctness, any valid beacon chain block reference can be used, as long as

> > it points to a block at a higher height and slot than the previous reference in the shard.

Reviewer: The same must also be allowed because the rate of block production is variable on all shards.

> However, to avoid referencing blocks that are too recent (and might not be visible to all nodes,
> increasing the risk of rejection), the reference implementation will use a fixed. Specifically,
> all nodes will aim to propose the most recent valid block they see in their view of the beacon

> > chain `1 / SLOT_PROBABILITY` in the past (which is currently set to 1/6, i.e. 6 slots which is ~6

Reviewer: Shouldn't it be 7?

> seconds). With this, farmers in a shard will try to set their blockchain reference to the most

> > recent valid beacon chain block. Failing to propose a block reference from the beacon chain that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> recent valid beacon chain block. Failing to include a block reference from the beacon chain that
```

> is 6 slots behind would mean that the farmer has fell out of sync. This forces shard farmers to be
> as up-to-date as possible with the beacon chain, while keeping as recent as possible references in

> > shard block (which will help with the linking and verification of information between shards).

Reviewer: I would rewrite this by simply defining what a valid reference is. "aiming" is not the right terminology here. Essentially for every slot produced on lower-level shard there is one and only one valid beacon chain block that must be included. Failure to include it makes block invalid.

Reviewer: There is a danger with this though: an attacker may withhold blocks for extra seconds, causing invalid blocks to be produced on lower-level shards. This probably means we should tweak the depth of included block from 6-7 to something larger. The idea being that if block production is 6 seconds on average on the beacon chain, delaying block announcement by one slot might actually not make that much of a difference (statistically speaking).

Or maybe I'm just hallucinating here, someone with a better grasp of probabilities should chime in.
